我的父亲
CHAPTER II
MY FATHER
 
MY father took a profound interest in my development. Perhaps I was much more observed by his paternal attention than I thought. We became much more knit together by common interests as my mind and body approached maturity. In the first place I became fascinated by the steam threshing machines which were just then for the first time being introduced into our agricultural life. With my father I went to work to learn the mechanism, and tasted, as I had never tasted before, the quiet joy of becoming a part of the working creative world. Machinery has its fascinations and I can understand how an engineer of a railway locomotive or an oiler in the hold of a ship may feel that a machine has a personality, sometimes irritating, sometimes friendly, with an inexhaustible generosity and helpfulness, power and wisdom.
 
But manual labor in my father’s blacksmith shop was not the only common interest we shared. It was inevitable that I should find a clearer understanding of those political and social questions which in the midst of discussions with the neighbors had appeared to me as unfathomable, and hence a stupid world of words. I could not follow as a child the arguments of lengthy debates around the table, nor did I grasp the reasons for the watchfulness and measures taken by the police. But now in an obscure way it all appeared as connected with the lives of strong men who not only dominate their own lives but also the lives of their fellow creatures. Slowly but fatally I was turning my spirit and my mind to new political ideals destined to flower for a time.
 
I began with young eyes to see that the tiny world about me was feeling uneasiness under the pinch of necessity. A deep and secret grudge was darkening the hearts of the common people. A country gentry of mediocrity in economic usefulness and of limited intellectual contribution were hanging upon the multitudes a weight of unjustified privileges. These were sad, dark years not only in my own province but for other parts of Italy. I must have the marks upon my memory of the resentful and furtive protests of those who came to talk with my father, some with bitterness of facts, some with a newly devised hope for some reform.
 
It was then, while I was still in my early teens, that my parents, after many serious talks, ending with a rapid family counsel, turned the rudder of my destiny in a new direction. They said that my manual work did not correspond to their ambitions for me, to their ability to aid me, nor did it fit my own capacities. My mother had a phrase which remains in my ears: “He promises something.”
 
 
From a photograph by A. Badodi, Milan.
 
Mussolini’s mother and father, Rosa and Alessandro Mussolini.
 
At the time I was not very enthusiastic about that conclusion; I had no real hunger for scholastic endeavor. I did not feel that I would languish if I did not go to a normal school and did not prepare to become a teacher. But my family were right. I had developed some capacities as a student and could increase them.
 
I went to the normal school at a place called Forlimpopoli. I remember my arrival in that small city. The citizens were cheerful and industrious, good at bargaining—tradesmen and middlemen. The school, however, had a greater distinction; it was conducted by Valfredo Carducci, brother of the great writer Giosue Carducci, who at that time was harvesting his laurels because of his poetry and his inspiration drawn from Roman classicism.
 
There was a long stretch of study ahead of me; to become a master—to have a teacher’s diploma—meant six years of books and pencils, ink and paper. I confess that I was not very assiduous. The bright side of those years of preparation to be a teacher came from my interest in reforming educational methods, and even more in an interest begun at that time and maintained ever since, an intense interest in the psychology of human masses—the crowd.
 
I was, I believe, unruly; and I was sometimes indiscreet. Youth has its passing restlessness and follies. Somehow I succeeded in gaining forgiveness. My masters were understanding and on the whole generous. But I have never been able to make up my mind how much of the indulgence accorded to me came from any hope they had in me or how much came from the fact that my father had acquired an increasing reputation for his moral and political integrity.
 
So the diploma came to me at last. I was a teacher! Many are the men who have found activity in political life who began as teachers. But then I saw only the prospect of the hard road of job hunting, letters of recommendation, scraping up a backing of influential persons and so on.
 
In a competition for a teacher’s place at Gualtieri, in the province of Reggio Emilia, I was successful. I had my taste of it. I taught for a year. On the last day of the school year I dictated an essay. I remember its thesis. It was: “By Persevering You Arrive.” For that I obtained the praise of my superiors.
 
So school was closed. I did not want to go back to my family. There was a narrow world for me, with affection to be sure, but restricted. There in Predappio one could neither move nor think without feeling at the end of a short rope. I had become conscious of myself, sensitive to my future. I felt the urge to escape.
 
Money I had not—merely a little. Courage was my asset. I would be an exile. I crossed the frontier; I entered Switzerland.
 
It was in this wander-life, now full of difficulties, toil, hardship and restlessness, that developed something in me. It was the milestone which marked my maturity. I entered into this new era as a man and politician. My confident soul began to be my support. I conceded nothing to pious demagoguery. I allowed myself, humble as was my figure, to be guided by my innate proudness and I saw myself in my own mental dress.
 
To this day I thank difficulties. They were more numerous than the nice, happy incidents. But the latter gave me nothing. The difficulties of life have hardened my spirit. They have taught me how to live.
 
For me it would have been dreadful and fatal if on my journey forward I had by chance fallen permanently into the chains of comfortable bureaucratic employment. How could I have adapted myself to that smug existence in a world bristling with interest and significant horizons? How could I have tolerated the halting progress of promotions, comforted and yet irritated by the thoughts of an old-age pension at the end of the dull road? Any comfortable cranny would have sapped my energies. These energies which I enjoy were trained by obstacles and even by bitterness of soul. They were made by struggle, not by the joys of the pathway.
 
My stay in Switzerland was a welter of difficulties. It did not last long, but it was angular, with harsh points. I worked with skill as a laborer. I worked usually as a mason and felt the fierce, grim pleasure of construction. I made translations from Italian into French and vice versa. I did whatever came to hand. I looked upon my friends with interest or affection or amusement.
 
Above all, I threw myself headforemost into the politics of the emigrant—of refugees, of those who sought solutions.
 
In politics I never gained a penny. I detest those who live like parasites, sucking away at the edges of social struggles. I hate men who grow rich in politics.
 
I knew hunger—stark hunger—in those days. But I never bent myself to ask for loans and I never tried to inspire the pity of those around me, nor of my own political companions. I reduced my needs to a minimum and that minimum—and sometimes less—I received from home.
 
With a kind of passion, I studied social sciences. Pareto was giving a course of lectures in Lausanne on political economy. I looked forward to every one. The mental exercise was a change from manual labor. My mind leaped toward this change and I found pleasure in learning. For here was a teacher who was outlining the fundamental economic philosophy of the future.
 
Between one lesson and another I took part in political gatherings. I made speeches. Some intemperance in my words made me undesirable to the Swiss authorities. They expelled me from two cantons. The university courses were over. I was forced into new places, and not until 1922 at the Conference of Lausanne, after I was Premier of Italy, did I see again some of my old haunts, filled with memories colorful or drab.
 
To remain in Switzerland became impossible. There was the yearning for home which blossoms in the hearts of all Italians. Furthermore, the compulsory service in the army was calling me. I came back. There were greetings, questions, all the incidents of the return of an adventurer—and then I joined the regiment—a Bersaglieri regiment at the historic city of Verona. The Bersaglieri wear green cock feathers in their hats; they are famous for their fast pace, a kind of monotonous and ground-covering dogtrot, and for their discipline and spirit.
 
I liked the life of a soldier. The sense of willing subordination suited my temperament. I was preceded by a reputation of being restless, a fire eater, a radical, a revolutionist. Consider then the astonishment of the captain, the major, and my colonels, who were compelled to speak of me with praise! It was my opportunity to show serenity of spirit and strength of character.
 
Verona, where my regiment was garrisoned, was and always will remain a dear Venetian city, reverberating with the past, filled with suggestive beauties. It found in my own temperament an echo of infinite resonance. I enjoyed its aromas as a man, but also as a private soldier I entered with vim into all the drills and the most difficult exercises. I found an affectionate regard for the mass, for the whole, made up of individuals, for its maneuvers and the tactics, the practice of defense and attack.
 
My capacity was that of a simple soldier; but I used to weigh the character, abilities and individualities of those who commanded me. All Italian soldiers to a certain extent do this. I learned in that way how important it is for an officer to have a deep knowledge of military matters and to develop a fine sensitiveness to the ranks, and to appreciate in the masses of our men our stern Latin sense of discipline and to be susceptible to its enchantments.
 
I can say that in every regard I was an excellent soldier. I might have taken up the courses for noncommissioned officers. But destiny, which dragged me from my father’s blacksmith shop to teaching and from teaching to exile and from exile to discipline, now decreed that I should not become a professional soldier. I had to ask for leave. At the time I swallowed the greatest sorrow in my life; it was the death of my mother.
 
One day my captain took me aside. He was so considerate that I felt in advance something impending. He asked me to read a telegram. It was from my father. My mother was dying! He urged my return. I rushed to catch the first train.
 
I arrived too late. My mother was in death’s agony. But from an almost imperceptible nod of her head I realized that she knew I had come. I saw her endeavor to smile. Then her head slowly drooped and she had gone.
 
All the independent strength of my soul, all my intellectual or philosophical resources—even my deep religious beliefs—were helpless to comfort that great grief. For many days I was lost. From me had been taken the one dear and truly near living being, the one soul closest and eternally adherent to my own responses.
 
Words of condolence, letters from my friends, the attempt to comfort me by other members of the family, filled not one tiny corner of that great void, nor opened even one fraction of an inch of the closed door.
 
My mother had suffered for me—in so many ways. She had lived so many hours of anxiety for me because of my wandering and pugnacious life. She had predicted my ascent. She had toiled and hoped too much and died before she was yet forty-eight years old. She had, in her quiet manner, done superhuman labors.
 
She might be alive now. She might have lived and enjoyed, with the power of her maternal instinct, my political success. It was not to be. But to me it is a comfort to feel that she, even now, can see me and help me in my labors with her unequaled love.
 
I, alone, returned to the regiment. I finished my last months of military service. And then my life and my future were again distended with uncertainty.
 
I went to Opeglia as a teacher again, knowing all the time that teaching did not suit me. This time I was a master in a middle school. After a period, off I went with Cesare Battisti, then chief editor of the Popolo. Later he was destined to become one of the greatest of our national heroes—he who gave his life, he who was executed by the enemy Austrians in the war, he who then was giving his thought and will to obtaining freedom of the province of Trento from the rule of Austria. His nobility and proud soul are always in my memory. His aspirations as a socialist-patriot called to me.
 
One day I wrote an article maintaining that the Italian border was not at Ala, the little town which in those days stood on the old frontier between our kingdom and the old Austria. Whereupon I was expelled from Austria by the Imperial and Royal Government of Vienna.
 
I was becoming used to expulsions. Once more a wanderer, I went back to Forli.
 
The itch of journalism was in me. My opportunity was before me in the editorship of a local socialist newspaper. I understood now that the Gordian knot of Italian political life could only be undone by an act of violence.
 
Therefore I became the public crier of this basic, partisan, warlike conception. The time had come to shake the souls of men and fire their minds to thinking and acting. It was not long before I was proclaimed the mouthpiece of the intransigent revolutionary socialist faction. I was only twenty-nine years old when at Reggio Emilia at the Congress in 1912, two years before the World War began, I was nominated as director of the Avanti. It was the only daily of the socialist cause and was published in Milan.
 
I lost my father just before I left for my new office. He was only fifty-seven. Nearly forty of those years had been spent in politics. His was a rectangular mind, a wise spirit, a generous heart. He had looked into the eyes of the first internationalist agitators and philosophers. He had been in prison for his ideas.
 
The Romagna—that part of Italy from which we all came—a spirited district with traditions of a struggle for freedom against foreign oppressions—knew my father’s merit. He wrestled year in and year out with endless difficulties and he had lost the small family patrimony by helping friends who had gone beyond their depth in the political struggle.
 
Prestige he had among all those who came into contact with him. The best political men of his day liked him and respected him. He died poor. I believe his foremost desire was to live to see his sons correctly estimated by public opinion.
 
At the end he understood at last that the old eternal traditional forces such as capital could not be permanently overthrown by a political revolution. He turned his attention at the end toward bettering the souls of individuals. He wanted to make mankind true of heart and sensitive to fraternity. Many were the speeches and articles about him after his death; three thousand of the men and women he had known followed his body to the grave. My father’s death marked the end of family unity for us, the family.
我的父亲对我的成长表现出极大的关注。也许我远比自己意识到的更加受到他那父爱的关注。随着我的思想与身体逐渐成熟，我们因为共同的兴趣变得更加紧密。首先吸引我注意的是刚刚在我们的农业生活中引入的蒸汽脱粒机。和父亲一起，我开始学习这些机器的结构，并初次体验到融入创造性劳动世界的静谧喜悦。机器有其独特的魅力，我完全能理解一个火车司机或轮船机舱里的加油工如何会觉得机器有自己的个性——有时让人恼火，有时又很友善，带着无穷的慷慨、助力、力量和智慧。
但在父亲的铁匠铺里做体力劳动并不是我们唯一的共同兴趣。我注定要更清楚地理解那些政治和社会问题——这些问题在邻居们的争论中曾让我觉得深不可测，因而显得像是一个无聊的词语世界。孩提时，我无法跟上餐桌上冗长辩论中的论点，也不明白为何警察会保持警惕并采取措施。但如今，我模模糊糊地觉得，这一切似乎都与那些不仅掌控自己生活，还影响其他人生活的强者息息相关。渐渐地，或许是不可避免地，我的精神与思想开始转向新的政治理想，这些理想注定会在未来某个时刻开花结果。
年轻的我开始意识到，身边这个小小的世界因生活的压力而感到不安。普通人的心中被一种深沉而隐秘的不满所笼罩。经济贡献平庸、智识贡献有限的乡村绅士们，将不合理的特权强加在群众身上。这不仅仅是我所在的省份，整个意大利的许多地方也经历了这些悲惨的黑暗岁月。我记忆深刻，那些前来与我父亲交谈的人中，有人满怀对事实的苦涩，有人带着刚刚萌生的改革希望，他们愤怒而隐忍的抗议仍深深印在我脑海中。
就在我十几岁时，我的父母经过许多次认真的讨论，最终召开了一次家庭会议，迅速地将我的人生方向转向了新的轨道。他们说，体力劳动并不符合他们对我的期望，也不配得上他们对我的支持，更不适合我的才能。我母亲的一句话至今萦绕在我耳边：“他有些出息。”
From a photograph by A. Badodi, Milan.
Mussolini’s mother and father, Rosa and Alessandro Mussolini.
当时，我对这个结论并不太感兴趣。我并没有对学术努力抱有多大的渴望，也不觉得如果不上师范学校、不为成为教师做准备，我就会失落。但我的家人是对的。我作为一名学生已经展现出了一些能力，而这些能力可以进一步提升。
我去了福利波波里的师范学校。我清楚地记得刚到这座小城时的情景。市民们性格开朗，勤劳肯干，擅长讨价还价——是商人和中间人。然而，这所学校却有更高的声望；它由瓦尔弗雷多·卡尔杜奇管理，他是伟大作家焦苏埃·卡尔杜奇的兄弟。那时，焦苏埃·卡尔杜奇正因其诗歌和从罗马古典主义汲取的灵感而名声大噪。
要获得教师资格证，需要经历漫长的学习过程——整整六年，伴随着书本、铅笔、墨水和纸张。我必须承认，我并不算勤勉。那些为成为教师而进行的准备学习中，最有趣的一部分是我对教育方法改革的兴趣，更重要的是，我从那时开始对人群心理学产生了浓厚兴趣，并一直延续至今。
我想，我那时可能有些难以管教，有时也会显得鲁莽。青春期总是伴随着短暂的躁动与愚蠢行为。但不知怎么的，我总能获得宽恕。我的老师们理解我，总体上待我宽厚。然而，我一直未能弄清他们对我的宽容究竟有多少是因为对我抱有希望，又有多少是因为我父亲因其道德与政治操守而赢得的声望日益提高。
最终，我拿到了文凭。我成为了一名教师！许多政治家都曾以教师作为起点。然而，当时我眼前的唯一前景是艰难的求职之路：寻找工作，撰写推荐信，努力寻求有影响力人士的支持等等。
在为雷焦艾米利亚省瓜尔泰里镇的一个教师职位进行的竞赛中，我成功了。我体验了一下当老师的滋味。教了一年。在学年最后一天，我布置了一篇作文。我记得它的主题是：“通过坚持，你会到达。”为此，我得到了上级的表扬。
于是，学校结束了。我不想回到家里。对我来说，那是一个狭窄的世界，虽充满亲情，却又有限。在普雷达皮奥，你无法自由行动，也无法思考，仿佛总被束缚在一条短绳的尽头。我开始意识到自己，敏感于未来。我感到有逃离的冲动。
我没有钱——只是些许。勇气是我的资本。我将成为一名流亡者。我越过了边境，进入了瑞士。
正是在这种充满困难、劳作、艰辛和不安的流浪生活中，我得到了成长。这是标志我成熟的里程碑。我进入了一个新的时代，作为一个男人和政治家。我自信的灵魂开始成为我的支撑。我没有屈服于虚伪的煽动性言辞。我允许自己，虽然我的身影很卑微，但依然被内心的骄傲指引，并看到了自己在思想上的形象。
直到今天，我仍然感谢那些困难。它们比那些愉快、幸福的事件要多得多。但后者给了我什么呢？生活的困难磨砺了我的心灵，教会了我如何生存。
如果在我前进的道路上，我不小心永远陷入了舒适的官僚工作中，那将是可怕且致命的。如何让我适应那种在充满兴趣和广阔视野的世界中，舒适生活的存在？如何忍受缓慢晋升的过程，尽管在那条单调的道路尽头会有一份养老金？任何舒适的角落都会削弱我的能量。正是这些能量，通过障碍甚至灵魂的痛苦培养出来的。它们是通过斗争锻造的，而不是通过通向舒适的快乐。
我在瑞士的时光充满了困难。虽然并不长，但却充满了棱角，充满了艰辛。我作为工人，技能娴熟地工作。通常我做砌砖工，体验着建设的激烈而严峻的快乐。我翻译意大利语和法语，做任何能做的工作。我以兴趣、亲切或欣赏的心情看待我的朋友们。
最重要的是，我全身心地投入到了移民政治中——难民的政治，寻求解决方案的人的政治。
在政治上，我从未赚过一分钱。我讨厌那些像寄生虫一样生活，啃食社会斗争边缘的人。我痛恨那些在政治中致富的男人。
那时，我曾经历饥饿——极度的饥饿。但我从未低头去借钱，也从未试图激发周围人，甚至是我自己的政治伙伴的同情。我将自己的需求减少到最低限度，而那最低限度——有时甚至更少——是从家里得到的。
带着一种激情，我学习社会科学。帕雷托在洛桑举办政治经济学讲座。我期待着每一堂课。精神上的锻炼是从体力劳动中的一种变化。我的思维向这种变化飞跃，我在学习中找到了乐趣。因为这里有一位老师，在勾画未来经济学的基本哲学。
在一课接一课之间，我参加了政治集会，并发表演讲。由于言辞过于激烈，我在瑞士当局眼中变得不受欢迎，他们将我驱逐出了两个州。大学课程结束了。我被迫进入新的环境，直到1922年在洛桑会议上，当时我已是意大利总理，才再次见到一些曾经熟悉的地方，充满了或鲜艳或暗淡的回忆。
留在瑞士变得不可能。每个意大利人心中都有那份对故乡的渴望。此外，强制性的兵役召唤着我。我回到了家。迎接、询问，所有回归冒险者的情景——然后，我加入了一个团——一个驻扎在历史名城维罗纳的步兵团。贝尔萨列里兵团士兵的帽子上插着绿色的公鸡羽毛；他们以快步走著称，一种单调而覆盖地面的慢跑，因其纪律性和精神而闻名。
我喜欢当兵的生活。愿意服从的感觉非常适合我的性格。我之前有个不安分的名声，喜欢冒险、激进、革命。想想看，队长、少校和我的上校们在得知我后，不得不称赞我！这是我展示冷静精神和坚韧品格的机会。
维罗纳，是我的团驻扎的地方，始终是一个亲爱的威尼斯城市，充满了历史的回响，弥漫着迷人的美景。在我自己性格中找到了无穷回响。我作为一个人享受它的芳香，但作为一名普通士兵，我也充满活力地参与所有的演习和最艰难的训练。我对集体产生了深厚的感情，对个体组成的整体产生了依恋，喜欢它的操练和战术，防守和进攻的实践。
我的能力只是一个普通士兵的水平；但我习惯于衡量指挥我的那些人的性格、能力和个性。所有的意大利士兵在某种程度上都会这样做。我以这种方式学到了，作为一名军官，深厚的军事知识和对部队的敏感非常重要，要能理解我们士兵的严格拉丁纪律感，并能领会它的魅力。
我可以说，在各方面，我都是一名出色的士兵。我本可以参加军官预备课程。但命运，将我从父亲的铁匠铺带到教书，从教书带到流亡，再从流亡带到军队，决定我不能成为职业军人。我必须申请休假。在那时，我经历了我一生中最大的痛苦；那就是母亲去世。
有一天，我的队长把我叫到一旁。他非常体贴，以至于我提前感觉到某种预感。他让我读了一份电报。是父亲发来的。母亲快不行了！他催促我回去。我急忙赶去，赶上了第一班火车。
我来得太晚了。母亲正在经历临终的痛苦。但从她几乎难以察觉的点头中，我知道她知道我来了。我看到她努力微笑。然后，她的头慢慢垂下，永远离开了。
我灵魂中所有的独立力量，我所有的知识或哲学资源——甚至我深沉的宗教信仰——都无力安慰那份巨大的悲痛。许多天，我感到迷失。唯一亲近而永远与我心灵紧密相连的生命被带走了，那唯一的灵魂，永远与我的回应相依。
安慰的话语，朋友们的信件，家人们尝试安慰我，都没有填补那巨大空虚的任何一丝空隙，甚至没有打开那扇紧闭的门的哪怕一小寸。
母亲为我承受了太多的痛苦——以多种方式。因为我流浪和好斗的生活，她经历了无数焦虑的时刻。她曾预见到我的上升。她付出了太多的辛劳和希望，却在四十八岁之前去世。她以她那安静的方式，做出了超人般的努力。
她现在可能还活着。她或许会用她那强大的母性本能，享受我的政治成功。但命运并未如此。但对我来说，感到安慰的是，即便如今，她依然能够看到我，并以她那无与伦比的爱帮助我在劳作中前行。
我独自回到了部队，完成了最后几个月的兵役。之后，我的生活和未来再次充满了不确定性。
我再次成为了教师，这次是教中学。我心里清楚，教书并不适合我。过了一段时间，我与切萨雷·巴蒂斯蒂一同前往，彼时他是《人民报》的主编。后来，他注定成为我们国家最伟大的英雄之一——为祖国献出生命的英雄——他在战争中被奥地利敌人处决，他为从奥地利统治下获得特伦托省的自由而献身。他的高贵与骄傲的灵魂一直留在我的记忆中。作为一名社会主义者和爱国者，他的抱负深深触动了我。
有一天，我写了一篇文章，提出意大利的边界不应止于阿拉，那座曾经是我们王国和古奥地利之间的边界小镇。因此，我被维也纳的帝国和皇家政府驱逐出奥地利。
我已经开始习惯被驱逐的生活。再次成为流浪者，我回到了福尔利。
新闻界的渴望在我心中燃起。我在地方社会主义报纸的编辑职位上看到了我的机会。我现在明白，意大利政治生活的戈尔迪乌斯之结只能通过暴力的行动解开。
因此，我成为了这一基本的、党派化的、战斗性概念的公然呼号者。时机已经到来，必须激发人们的灵魂，激励他们的思维和行动。很快，我被宣布为不可妥协的革命社会主义派别的代言人。当时我年仅二十九岁，在1912年，第一次世界大战爆发前两年，在雷焦艾米利亚的大会上，我被提名为《前进报》的主任。这是社会主义事业唯一的日报，总部设在米兰。
在我去新职务之前，我失去了父亲。他才五十七岁。几乎四十年时间，他都在政治中度过。他的心智方正，精神智慧，心胸宽广。他曾目睹过首批国际主义激进分子和哲学家的眼神。他曾因自己的思想而入狱。
罗马涅——那片我们所有人都来自的土地——是一个充满活力的地区，拥有反抗外国压迫、争取自由的传统——了解我父亲的功绩。他年复一年地与无尽的困难作斗争，因帮助那些在政治斗争中陷入困境的朋友，失去了微薄的家产。
他在所有与他接触的人中都享有声望。他那个时代最杰出的政治人物都喜欢他、尊敬他。他死时贫困。我相信他最希望的是活着看到他的儿子们得到公众的正确评价。
最终，他终于明白，像资本这样的古老的、永恒的传统力量不能通过政治革命永久推翻。他最后将注意力转向了改善个体的灵魂。他希望使人类变得真诚，敏感于兄弟情谊。父亲去世后，许多关于他的演讲和文章纷纷出现；三千名曾与他相识的男女跟随他的遗体送往墓地。父亲的去世标志着我们家庭团结的终结。
